# kickstarter-success-prediction
**Data Preprocessing:** After analyzing the columns and considering the models we are trying to build, we can conclude that variables which can only be observed after launch (e.g., backer count, spotlight, and amount pledged), highly correlated variables, identifier categorical variables, and predominantly single-class categorical variables must be excluded. Missing values in the category column are replaced with a constant. In addition, extreme outliers were removed via anomaly detection since they can affect the results of clustering by shifting the cluster centers. Additionally, features were standardized to meet the clustering model assumption that all features are equally scaled (Albon, 2018). Variables likely to have a low-predictive value (i.e., project deadline hour) were excluded from the analysis. The goal column has the goal amount in the currency of the country where the project has been developed. To keep all projects on the same scale, it is multiplied by the static USD rate. Finally, the variable goal to launch period ratio was calculated to add a time dimension to the goal. 

**Random Forest Classification Model:** A Random Forest Classifier is developed with optimal values  of hyperparameters in order for the model to accurately forecast the success of a Kickstarter project. Hyperparameters were tuned by using a for loop to compare the performance of the same model.  Cross validation is used to get an estimate for how accurate each model is. The random forest classifier is an ensemble of many uncorrelated decision trees built with bootstrapped samples. Each tree developed uses the full set of features, but at each node, only a random subset of features is considered. The algorithm uses the forest's predictive powers to make accurate predictions (Albon, 2018). The model correctly classifies 964 projects as successful (true positive). On the other hand, 346 projects were correctly classified as unsuccessful (true negative). However, 49 projects are incorrectly classified as successful (false positive), and 236 points are incorrectly classified as belonging to the negative class (unsuccessful) by the model (false negative). The classifier has an 82% accuracy level. Project goal, name length (clean), create to launch days, and goal to launch time are the most important features in the model (they decrease the impurity of the node the most).

**K-Means Clustering Model:** A K-means clustering algorithm was created to explore factors associated with successful vs. unsuccessful projects. Projects are clustered based on three variables identified as important for prediction: goal (USD), name length (clean), and development period (number of days between project creation and the public launch date). The optimal number of clusters is found using the computed inertia values. At four clusters, within-cluster variation (inertia) is ideally minimized (i.e., after this point the distortion/inertia starts decreasing in a linear fashion). Individual silhouette coefficients range between ~0.3 to 0.5, indicating relatively dense and well-separated clusters. The average silhouette score has a value near 0 indicating some overlapping between clusters. Cluster 1 (C1) is comprised of projects with longer names, while C2 contains shorter names. C1 has ~50% more successful projects than C2. A reason for this may be that longer names contain more key word terms that could come up in searches and increase exposure for successful funding. C3 contains a small selection of projects, but logically suggests that projects with large funding goals and short development periods are unlikely to be successfully funded; possibly, short development periods do not allow the creative process to take as long as it needs to take resulting in generic designs and rushed concepts. In contrast, C4 contains projects with a larger number of days between project creation and the public launch date and longer project names resulting in more successfully funded projects.

**Business Implications:** Kickstarter generates revenue from a percentage of the funds successfully raised. If a project does not reach its funding goal, no fees are collected. The company uses this money to run its site which includes advertising and employee payment. The classification model developed accurately classified 82% of total projects; more specifically, 88% of all projects identified as successful were in fact successful (precision), and of all successful projects, 59% were identified as such (recall). For Kickstarter, it is desirable that the model have a high precision but low recall. In laymen’s terms, it is preferable that a model return very few results, but most of its predicted labels are correct when compared to the training labels (Albon, 2018). In addition, it would allow Kickstarter to protect its reputation from frequent false claims of project success and maximize its investment (e.g., time, resources, and human capital) into good projects which are more likely to be successful . Although, crowdfunding platforms are increasingly attracting investors, project success rates are decreasing, inversely proportional to the increase in interest (Rao et al., 2014). It would be therefore beneficial for Kickstarter to pursue this model and provide insights to its creators via a subscription-based report.

**References**

Albon, C. (2018). Machine learning with python cookbook: Practical solutions from preprocessing to deep learning. " O'Reilly Media, Inc.".

Rao, H., Xu, A., Yang, X., & Fu, W. T. (2014, April). Emerging dynamics in crowdfunding campaigns. In International Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction (pp. 333-340). Springer, Cham.
